---
category: Article
article: Article 26  Obligations of importers.md
---

1. Before placing a high-risk AI system on the market, importers of such system shall ensure that:

	1. {a}(a)the appropriate [conformity assessment](conformity assessment.html) procedure has been carried out by the [provider](provider.html) of that AI system
	2. (b)the [provider](provider.html) has drawn up the technical documentation in accordance with Annex IV;
	3. (c)the system bears the required conformity marking and is accompanied by the required documentation and instructions of use.

2. Where an [importer](importer.html) considers or has reason to consider that a high-risk AI system is not in conformity with this Regulation, it shall not place that system on the market until that AI system has been brought into conformity. Where the high-risk AI system presents a risk within the meaning of Article 651. , the [importer](importer.html) shall inform the [provider](provider.html) of the AI system and the market surveillance authorities to that effect.

3. Importers shall indicate their name, registered trade name or registered trade mark, and the address at which they can be contacted on the high-risk AI system or, where that is not possible, on its packaging or its accompanying documentation, as applicable.

4. Importers shall ensure that, while a high-risk AI system is under their responsibility, where applicable, storage or transport conditions do not jeopardise its compliance with the requirements set out in Chapter 2 of this Title.

5. Importers shall provide national competent authorities, upon a reasoned request, with all necessary information and documentation to demonstrate the conformity of a high-risk AI system with the requirements set out in Chapter 2 of this Title in a language which can be easily understood by that [national competent authority](national competent authority.html), including access to the logs automatically generated by the high-risk AI system to the extent such logs are under the control of the [provider](provider.html) by virtue of a contractual arrangement with the [user](user.html) or otherwise by law. They shall also cooperate with those authorities on any action [national competent authority](national competent authority.html) takes in relation to that system.