---
category: Article
article: Article 27  Obligations of distributors.md
---

1. Before making a high-risk AI system available on the market, distributors shall verify that the high-risk AI system bears the required CE conformity marking, that it is accompanied by the required documentation and instruction of use, and that the [provider](provider.html) and the [importer](importer.html) of the system, as applicable, have complied with the obligations set out in this Regulation.

2. Where a [distributor](distributor.html) considers or has reason to consider that a high-risk AI system is not in conformity with the requirements set out in Chapter 2 of this Title, it shall not make the high-risk AI system available on the market until that system has been brought into conformity with those requirements. Furthermore, where the system presents a risk within the meaning of Article 651. , the [distributor](distributor.html) shall inform the [provider](provider.html) or the [importer](importer.html) of the system, as applicable, to that effect.

3. Distributors shall ensure that, while a high-risk AI system is under their responsibility, where applicable, storage or transport conditions do not jeopardise the compliance of the system with the requirements set out in Chapter 2 of this Title.

4. A [distributor](distributor.html) that considers or has reason to consider that a high-risk AI system which it has made available on the market is not in conformity with the requirements set out in Chapter 2 of this Title shall take the corrective actions necessary to bring that system into conformity with those requirements, to withdraw it or recall it or shall ensure that the [provider](provider.html), the [importer](importer.html) or any relevant [operator](operator.html), as appropriate, takes those corrective actions. Where the high-risk AI system presents a risk within the meaning of Article 651. , the [distributor](distributor.html) shall immediately inform the national competent authorities of the Member States in which it has made the product available to that effect, giving details, in particular, of the non-compliance and of any corrective actions taken.

5. Upon a reasoned request from a [national competent authority](national competent authority.html), distributors of [high-risk AI systems](high-risk AI systems.html) shall provide that authority with all the information and documentation necessary to demonstrate the conformity of a high-risk system with the requirements set out in Chapter 2 of this Title. Distributors shall also cooperate with that [national competent authority](national competent authority.html) on any action taken by that authority.