---
category: Article
article: Article 47  Derogation from conformity assessment procedure.md
---

1. By way of derogation from Article 43, any [market surveillance authority](market surveillance authority.html) may authorise the [placing on the market](placing on the market.html) or [putting into service](putting into service.html) of specific [high-risk AI systems](high-risk AI systems.html) within the territory of the Member State concerned, for exceptional reasons of public security or the protection of life and health of persons, environmental protection and the protection of key industrial and infrastructural assets. That authorisation shall be for a limited period of time, while the necessary conformity assessment procedures are being carried out, and shall terminate once those procedures have been completed. The completion of those procedures shall be undertaken without undue delay.

2. The authorisation referred to in paragraph 1 shall be issued only if the [market surveillance authority](market surveillance authority.html) concludes that the high-risk AI system complies with the requirements of Chapter 2 of this Title. The [market surveillance authority](market surveillance authority.html) shall inform the Commission and the other Member States of any authorisation issued pursuant to paragraph 1.

3. Where, within 15 calendar days of receipt of the information referred to in paragraph 2, no objection has been raised by either a Member State or the Commission in respect of an authorisation issued by a [market surveillance authority](market surveillance authority.html) of a Member State in accordance with paragraph 1, that authorisation shall be deemed justified.

4. Where, within 15 calendar days of receipt of the notification referred to in paragraph 2, objections are raised by a Member State against an authorisation issued by a [market surveillance authority](market surveillance authority.html) of another Member State, or where the Commission considers the authorisation to be contrary to Union law or the conclusion of the Member States regarding the compliance of the system as referred to in paragraph 2 to be unfounded, the Commission shall without delay enter into consultation with the relevant Member State; the [operator](operator.html)(s) concerned shall be consulted and have the possibility to present their views. In view thereof, the Commission shall decide whether the authorisation is justified or not. The Commission shall address its decision to the Member State concerned and the relevant [operator](operator.html) or operators.

5. If the authorisation is considered unjustified, this shall be withdrawn by the [market surveillance authority](market surveillance authority.html) of the Member State concerned.

6. By way of derogation from paragraphs 1 to 5, for [high-risk AI systems](high-risk AI systems.html) intended to be used as safety components of devices, or which are themselves devices, covered by Regulation (EU) 2017/745 and Regulation (EU) 2017/746, Article 59 of Regulation (EU) 2017/745 and Article 54 of Regulation (EU) 2017/746 shall apply also with regard to the derogation from the [conformity assessment](conformity assessment.html) of the compliance with the requirements set out in Chapter 2 of this Title.